---
date: '2020-06-10 20:21 -0400'
category: news
layout: news-item
published: false
title: 'Scholar-Activist Encounter: Mauricio Salgado and Ched Myers'
---
The Center and Library for the Bible and Social Justice invites you to
join us online each third Thursday at 4:30pm Pacific Time / 7:30pm
Eastern Time for an interactive dialogue exploring the interfaces
between scholarship and activism. How do these ways of being contribute
to our understanding of Scripture in the world today? Let’s come
together to learn from each other.

In this session, Activist theologian Ched Myers and Drama Professor
Mauricio Tafur Salgado will discuss their work to create capacity for
movement-building through arts, documentation and scholarship, and the
way this work has shaped and been shaped by their faith.

**Advance registration required: Check back for registration link.**

Ched Myers is an activist theologian who has worked in social change
movements for 40 years. With a degree in New Testament Studies, he is a
popular educator who animates scripture and issues of faith-based peace
and justice. He has authored over 100 articles and a half-dozen books,
including _Binding the Strong Man: A Political Reading of Mark’s Story of
Jesus_ (1988), _The Biblical Vision of Sabbath Economics_ (2001),
_Ambassadors of Reconciliation: A N.T. Theology and Diverse Christian
Practices of Restorative Justice and Peacemaking_ (with Elaine Enns,
Orbis, 2009), and most recently, _Watershed Discipleship: Reinhabiting
Bioregional Discipleship_ (Cascade, 2016). You can find Ched’s
publications at [www.ChedMyers.org](http://www.chedmyers.org). 
Ched is a co-founder of the Word and
World School, the Sabbath Economics Collaborative, and the Center and
Library for the Bible and Social Justice. He and his partner Elaine
Enns, a restorative justice practitioner, live in the Ventura River
watershed in southern California on traditional Chumash territory, and
work with Bartimaeus Cooperative Ministries.

Mauricio Tafur Salgado is an Assistant Arts Professor of Theatre Studies
in the Department of Drama at NYU Tisch School of the Arts. Salgado is
mestizo + first gen + born to proudly subversive Colombians + brown
skinned + amateur bio-regionalist + aspiring theologian + cis-hetero +
married + artist, pursuing justice and healing through a decolonial
framework. He collaborates to organize space where folx rehearse
revolution, compromise, rage, tolerance, strength, trust, and
vulnerability. Prior to joining Tisch Drama, Salgado co-founded Artists
Striving to End Poverty (ASTEP). At ASTEP, he recruited, trained, and
supported more than 325 teaching artists and created and implemented 23
programs for artistic youth. He is currently a founding creative
producer with the Remember2019 Collective, which supports local black
cultural workers in Phillips County, Ark., as they facilitate spaces for
self-determination, memory, and reflection that are directly related to
the Elaine Massacre. He has worked as a facilitator, actor, deviser, and
director with communities in Peru, the Dominican Republic, South Africa,
India, Belgium, Germany, Scotland, and across Turtle Island (the United
States). He has taught at the Boston Conservatory, Brown University,
Santa Clara University, La Guardia Community College, and Kingsborough
Community College.

Questions: email [info@clbsj.org](mailto:info@clbsj.org)

Co-sponsored by the Community of Living Traditions and Stony Point Center.