---
date: '2020-12-01'
category: news
layout: news-item
published: true
title: "Re-Potting Update: Help Cultivate our Roots & Shoots!"
description: >-
  As we near the close of this year of trauma and transformation, we are
  glad to be able to provide you with a hope-filled update from the Center
  and Library for the Bible and Social Justice — and to invite you to join
  with us to strengthen our foundation for the year to come.
---
Grace and peace, friends and comrades!

As we near the close of this year of trauma and transformation, we are
glad to be able to provide you with a hope-filled update from the Center
and Library for the Bible and Social Justice — and to invite you to join
with us to strengthen our foundation for the year to come.

In the middle of the first wave of the COVID19 pandemic, the CLBSJ Board
of Directors made a decision to respond to the signs of the times by
shifting our focus toward the building and strengthening of organizing
relationships. Our outgoing Board Secretary Ched Myers referred to this
process as “re-potting.”

Many of you stepped up to enable this re-potting, and we are so
grateful for that. CLBSJ relies almost entirely on individual donations
and pledges — we can only grow through your generosity and investment.

As part of our re-potting process, we launched a series called
“Scholar-Activist Encounters” in which our Board members draw upon their
working relationships to cultivate intimate conversations about how
activism and scholarship contribute to our understanding of Scripture in
the world today. It has been beautiful to witness the ekklesia that
these encounters have engendered. The epistemological explorations they
are sparking extends beyond the two dialogue partners to include all
those participating and witnessing. We are humbled and grateful to be on
this journey with you! The next Encounter will be on December 17 and
will feature [lifelong peace activist Weldon Nisly and Biblical scholar
Tom Boomershine](https://clbsj.org/events/2020/12/17/scholar-activist-encounter-weldon-nisley-and-tom-boomershine/).

The year’s challenges have also offered us the opportunity to refocus on
the “Center” aspect of our “Center and Library.” Responding to the
disturbing news of the forced downsizing of Stony Point Center, CLBSJ
has stepped up to facilitate space and resources for local activist
organizations that have come to rely on Stony Point Center for support.
In collaboration with Proyecto Faro, Muslim Peace Fellowship, the
Community of Living Traditions, and others, we are cultivating a
cooperative workspace for faith-rooted action and reflection. Our
Library Team is pursuing ways to adjust the presentation of our
collection so as to maximize its usability to the members of these groups.

As new leaders in CLBSJ, we are blessed to have the opportunity to get
our hands dirty in this re-potting effort — and we are deeply excited to
see the shoots that are emerging.

Could you join with us today to help us cultivate this new growth?
Please consider making a regular pledge, which will help us to start
2021 on a firm foundation. You can make contributions by mail or via paypal -- go to
 [clbsj.org/donate](https://clbsj.org/donate) for links and instructions..

Do you have other ideas for how to support CLBSJ? If you are a pastor or
church leader, could your church designate a gift from your pastor’s
continuing education fund, or another fund? Please email us at
[info@clbsj.org](mailto:info@clbsj.org) with your ideas or questions.

As we move forward, one of the most important forms of fertilizing that
our new growth requires is guidance and encouragement from our elders.
In that spirit, we are planning a tribute to the leadership of Dr. John
H. “Jack” Elliot, founding Board President and pioneer in the social
scientific study of Scripture. This event will take place in early 2021
— stay tuned for more details!

Thank you so much for reading this update, and for considering a pledge
or end-of the year gift. Any level of support or feedback will help to
nurture our new growth. We are so glad to count you as a fellow traveler
in this work!

In faith and solidarity,

<div style="float:left;margin-right:3em;">
  Nick Johnson<br/>     
  Board President
</div>

<div style="float:left">
  Amy Dalton<br/>
  Executive Director
</div>           
