---
date: '2020-07-16'
category: events
layout: event
published: false
title: 'Scholar-Activist Encounter: Charo Ureña and Amy Dalton'
description: >-
  In this session, faith-rooted organizers Amy Dalton and Rosarion "Charo" Ureña
  will discuss their work within the immigrant rights movement, their seminary
  studies, and how their faith has evolved through their activist journey.
---
The Center and Library for the Bible and Social Justice invites you to
join us online each third Thursday at 4:30pm Pacific Time / 7:30pm
Eastern Time for an interactive dialogue exploring the interfaces
between scholarship and activism. How do these ways of being contribute
to our understanding of Scripture in the world today? Let’s come
together to learn from each other.

In this session, faith-rooted organizers Amy Dalton and Rosarion "Charo"
Ureña will discuss their work within the immigrant rights movement,
their seminary studies, and how their faith has evolved through their
activist journey.

Advance registration required: Check back soon for registration link.

Rosario "Charo" Urena is the founder, lead organizer and Director of
Proyecto Faro, an immigrant-led organizing project based in Stony Point,
NY. She is a graduate of Kairos School of Ministry and a member of
Iglesia Camino Verdad y Vida. Her passion for social justice was
catalyzed by the experience of advocating for her community after it was
flooded during Hurricane Sandy. She is originally from the Dominican
Republic where she regularly visits family members. Stateside, she
enjoys spending time with her two daughters and one precious granddaughter.

Amy Dalton is a faith-rooted scholar-activist who has been an
“observer-participant” in many social justice movements, including Black
Lives Matter and African solidarity organizing, the sanctuary movement
and immigrant advocacy, the global indymedia network, death penalty and
prison abolition, student-labor solidarity, women’s and LGBTQIA
liberation. She is a member of the support team of Proyecto Faro, a
founding member of the Ambazonia Prisoners of Conscience Support
Network, a member of the Community of Living Traditions, and serves on
the board of the Center and Library for the Bible and Social Justice
(CLBSJ). Amy holds a Master of Divinity from Union Theological Seminary
with a research focus in faith-based community organizing, and a
Bachelor of Arts with high honors in sociology/anthropology from
Swarthmore College with research focuses in prison history, anthropology
of religion and Marxist social theory. She was raised primarily as a
United Methodist, and has also been influenced by the tradition of
devotion to Mother Mary.

Questions: email [info@clbsj.org](mailto:info@clbsj.org)

Co-sponsored by the Community of Living Traditions and Stony Point Center.