---
date: '2020-09-17'
category: events
layout: scholar-activist-encounter
published: true
title: 'Scholar-Activist Encounter: Eben “Sphynx” Egbe and Norman Gottwald'
description: >-
  In this session, Biblical scholar Norman Gottwald and anticolonial organizer
  Eben “Sphynx” Egbe will discuss their strivings for a world free of structural
  racism, and how the Bible and their Baptist upbringings have shaped their work
  and commitment.
---
In this session, Biblical scholar Norman Gottwald and anticolonial
organizer Eben “Sphynx” Egbe will discuss their strivings for a world
free of structural racism, and how the Bible and their Baptist
upbringings have shaped their work and commitment. Advance registration is required.

{% include registration-button.html link="https://us02web.zoom.us/meeting/register/tZwucuiurz8iH9ehReExrtWShKzutaQPD0Nz" %}

## About the participants

**Eben “Sphynx” Egbe** is an anticolonial organizer and open source
technologist. Raised primarily by his Baptist mother in the west African
nation of Ambazonia (also known as English-speaking Cameroons), Eben has
been an active participant in the movement against neocolonial control
of his homeland since the 1990s when he was a leader in the student
movement. Because of the crackdown against student leaders, he had to go
into exile in 1996. Since then he has done human rights work with folks
from the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), the Iranian Socialist Party
(Jonbesh), Zapatista solidarity networks, and the global indymedia
movement. He served as the Spokesperson of the German No-Borders Network
official delegation to the European Social Forums in Paris (2003) and
London (2004). In 2004, he helped launched the Indymedia Africa Working
Group, which organized six independent media convergences around Africa.
He is currently co-founder and shaper of the Ambazonia Prisoners of
Conscience Support Network and the Global Initiative to end the
Cameroons Colonial Conflict, a member of the Community of Living
Traditions, and a Board member of the Central Africa Human Rights
Defenders Network (known by its French acronym REDHAC). He is the REDHAC
section representative at War Resisters International and a member of
the organizing team for the emerging Racial Justice Has No Borders
Coalition. Eben is is a PhD candidate at the University of Minnesota’s
Department of Scientific Computation in the College of Science &
Engineering and a member of the Empowerment Lab.

**Norman K. Gottwald** is Professor Emeritus of Biblical Studies at New York
Theological Seminary and taught previously at the Graduate Theological
Union and Andover Newton Theological School. He is author of The Tribes
of Yahweh, a celebrated study of the origins of ancient Israel as an
indigenous peasant uprising. His other writings include _The Hebrew
Bible: A Socio-Literary Introduction_, _The Hebrew Bible in Its Social
World and in Ours_, _The Politics of Ancient Israel_, and, as co-author,
_The Bible and Liberation: Political and Social Hermeneutics_. He is a
pioneer in the use of social theory and method in biblical studies, a
world-wide lecturer on the critical relevance of the Bible to
contemporary social struggles, and a citizen activist in numerous civil
rights, anti-war, and pro-labor movements and organizations. As an
ordained minister of American Baptist Churches USA, he is a strong
advocate of popular biblical study committed to social change.
