---
date: '2020-06-09 14:45 -0400'
category: news
layout: news-item
published: true
title: Did You Know? Doug Bendall's Quantum Theology
description: >-
  Did you know that one of our Board Members is writing a book on theology and
  quantum physics?
---
Did you know that one of our Board Members is writing a book on theology
and quantum physics? Rev. Dr. R. Douglas Bendall, PhD's forthcoming
book, _The Human Face of God_, develops a Field Concept of God that
emerges from a theological analysis of the two core theories of modern
physics. Using the Minkowski space-time diagram of Special Relativity
and Whitehead’s demonstration that quantum theory requires a concept of
God, Dr. Bendall describes God’s action in the universe in terms of
dynamic creator-creatures relationships in Hilbert space. The events of
Nature are shown to become actual occasions as a result of the selection
of real transcendent possibilities that are entangled with factors
derived from prior immediate events. Every event in Nature can be
described in terms of God’s active participation in the creative advance
of Nature and the past events that constitute its physical pole. As a
result of this fundamental structure of the processes of becoming in the
Universe, every event can be seen to be the outcome of the actualization
of real possibilities, i.e., in terms of God’s creative activity, and at
the same time the result of the interactions between physical realities,
i.e., in terms of natural events. There is but one system of Reality,
which consists of God and God’s creatures.

Dr. Bendall is a significant supporter of CLBSJ. He made the motion to
bring CLBSJ into being. He was instrumental in finding the space at
Stony Point Center, and obtained the pro-bono lawyer that set up CLBSJ
as a 501c3. He and his son gave the first donation to CLBSJ. Dr. Bendall
is also an Episcopal priest and the founder of the Newark School of
Theology in New Jersey, and is married to the playwright Jennifer
Fell-Hayes. He can be contacted at [rdbendall@aol.com](mailto:rdbendall@aol.com).
