---
date: '2020-06-09 14:38 -0400'
category: news
layout: news-item
published: false
title: 'Building Connections: Urban Theology Unit, Sheffield, England'
description: >-
  John Vincent’s visit to CLBSJ last November delivered a resounding jolt to us
  in Stony Point, NY, as well as to the faculty and students he addressed at New
  York Theological Seminary, the staff at InnerChange East Harlem, and
  discipleship groups in Jersey City. At 91 years of age, John serves as elder
  of the social justice organization he founded in Sheffield, England. His Urban
  Theology Unit is closely parallel to CLBSJ in mission and vision.
author: ''
author_bio: ''
location: ''
tags: ''
---
John Vincent’s visit to CLBSJ last November delivered a resounding jolt
to us in Stony Point, NY, as well as to the faculty and students he
addressed at New York Theological Seminary, the staff at InnerChange
East Harlem, and discipleship groups in Jersey City. At 91 years of age,
John serves as elder of the social justice organization he founded in
Sheffield, England. His Urban Theology Unit is closely parallel to CLBSJ
in mission and vision.

John, a Methodist minister, was headed for an academic career when he
earned his Doctorate at the University of Basel where Karl Barth was
then teaching. His dissertation was on the Gospel of Mark. Increasingly,
the voice of Jesus’s calling to the disciples became a personal calling
to John. The Gospel of Mark became a guiding and energizing motif for
John as he turned to serve the pastoral and social needs of the inner
city and to teach generations of seminarians, clergy and laity
concerning the demands of Christian discipleship as an imperative for
the present day.

John understands the essence of Mark’s portrayal of Jesus as not to
believe in Jesus, not to worship Jesus, but to follow him: "Do as I do!"
It is the calling of every Christian to discern what "doing as Jesus
did" personally requires. John models a process of “Practice
Interpretation” of the Biblical text. After all the other forms of
Biblical criticisms are put in play, we are challenged with the
question, "What does this text tell me to do?"

John's blunt but loving advocacy of discipleship, moved by his deep
conviction, and salted by his down-to-earth wit, made a deeply
impression at CLBSJ. We are looking forward to finding ways to
co-operate with the Urban Theology Unit going forward.