---
date: '2020-12-22'
category: news
layout: news-item
author: Norman Gottwald
published: true
title: A Tribute to John "Jack" Elliott
description: >-
  John H. Elliott better, known as "Jack," is solidly established in the
  scholarly world as a master interpreter of 1st Peter and an ardent advocate of
  social-scientific criticism in biblical studies.
---
_We are heartbroken at the sudden passing of CLBSJ cofounder and former
Board President John H. "Jack" Elliott on December 13, 2020. Jack had
recently retired from his position as President of the CLBSJ Board due
to health complications from a fall. We were anticipating his recovery
and looking forward to featuring his work in an upcoming
Scholar-Activist Encounter. We still hope to present an event honoring
Jack’s unique body of work. If you have a testimony of how his
scholarship has impacted your path, please send it to [info@clbsj.org](mailto:info@clbsj.org)._

_Here, CLBSJ cofounder Norman Gottwald offers a personal tribute to
Jack’s contributions as a biblical scholar and an activist._

John H. Elliott better, known as "Jack," is solidly established in the
scholarly world as a master interpreter of 1st Peter and an ardent
advocate of social-scientific criticism in biblical studies. Precisely
by insisting on social-critical method, Jack has been able to show that
the "resident aliens and strangers" addressed in 1st Peter are actually
Christ-believing social refugees forced to live on the margins of
Greco-Roman society in Asia Minor. His detailed defense of that
hypothesis in _A Home for the Homeless_ (1981), and his magisterial
commentary on the same book, have won him a primary position among
Petrine scholars. Jack went on to provide the first systematic
presentation of social-scientific criticism in a handbook whose title
goes straight to the point, _What is Social-Scientific Criticism?_ (1993).

Jack came to his studies with a solid training in the textual and
historical tools of biblical studies, beginning with classical languages
in high school and the full panoply of graduate theological studies at
Concordia College and Seminary, capped by postgraduate study in Germany.
His subsequent teaching at Concordia Seminary was cut short by the
fundamentalist collapse of the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod. By a
remarkable turn of fate, Jack was invited to join the faculty of the
Jesuit University of San Francisco. About the same time, Jack and I,
along with other Bay Area biblical scholars such as Anne Wire, Marvin
Chaney, and Herman Waetjen, began to immerse ourselves in sociological
literature and to apply sociological methods to biblical texts and
topics in both Testaments.

A feature of Jack's scholarship that has marked his way of working is
his commitment to serious conversation with other biblical interpreters
gathered in the Society of Biblical Literature, the Catholic Biblical
Association, and, most importantly,  with the Context Group composed
internationally of social and cultural critics meeting annually for more
than twenty years in their quest to understand biblical texts through
the lenses of social and political theory.

No aspect of Jack's work exhibits his blend of academic rigor, church
commitment, and social activism more vividly than his involvement over
the years in the Sanctuary Movement, as his congregation, the University
Lutheran Chapel in Berkeley, California offered asylum to war resisters
and Central American political refugees. Jack viewed this ministry to
the marginalized as inspired by the early Christian communities of
"resident aliens and strangers" in 1st Peter. Less well known in his
activist career, Jack played a major leadership role in the protracted,
ultimately successful, struggle to unionize the faculty of the
University of San Francisco, the first such successful campaign in the
United States. Not to be overlooked was his teaching stint at the
Pontifical Biblical Institute, in Rome, where he served as the first and
only Lutheran since the reformation to be so honored.

Jack’s most recent project was our Library and Center for the Bible and
Social Justice, which began as a vision that he, Herman Waetjen, and I
shared, to establish a research library and educational center
connecting biblically-informed activists and justice-oriented scholars
in order to develop an empowering use of the Bible for advancing social
justice today. The subsequent history of CLBSJ, established in 2011, has
yet to be written, but we are thriving in large part because of the work
of Jack as our first and continuing President and as the cool-headed
chair of our monthly board meetings.

Finally, there was one consuming interest of "Jack's" that I am
uncertain how to celebrate, but I think it has to be recognized because
it has engaged so much of his attention in recent decades. I speak of
his research on the "evil eye" as  a look or gaze believed to cause
injury or misfortune, even death, to others. The results of his research
are published in four volumes, an exhaustive work that is almost certain
to dominate the field for a century or more to come. I mention this
"evil eye" project because it shows how extensive and intensive Jack’s
research has typically been and it shows his willingness to explore
topics that others would call tangential to biblical studies, but which
in the end are likely to make an unforeseen contribution to biblical
exegesis.

In conclusion, aside from my affection for a long-standing friend, I
find it difficult to exaggerate the work that Jack has accomplish as
scholar, teacher, and agent for social justice, not to forget his
towering achievement as co-founder of our cherished Center and Library
for the Bible and Social Justice.

## Selected Bibliography

_The Elect and the Holy. An Exegetical Examination of 1 Peter 2:4-10 and the Phrase basileion hierateuma._ Supplements to Novum Testamentum 12. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1966; reprinted, Wipf & Stock, Eugene, OR, 2006.

_Doxology: God's People Called to Celebrate His Glory._ St. Louis, 1966.

_The Christ-Life: Jesus Christ the Sacrament and Sacramental Living._ Chicago, 1968.

_Proclamation: Aids for Interpreting the Lessons of the Church Year. Series A. Pentecost 3._
Co-authored with Bruce Vawter.  Philadelphia: Fortress, 1975.

_1 Peter: Estrangement and Community._ Herald Biblical Booklets.
Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press, 1979.

_A Home for the Homeless.  A Sociological Exegesis of 1 Peter, Its  Situation and Strategy._
Philadelphia: Fortress, 1981; 2nd edition 1990; reprinted Wipf & Stock, Eugene, OR, 2005; translated into Portuguese and Spanish.

_I-II Peter/Jude_ in: R. A. Martin and John Elliott, James, I-II Peter/Jude.  Augsburg Commentary
on the New Testament. Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1982; translated into Chinese.

_What is Social-Scientific Criticism? Guides to Biblical Scholarship._ Minneapolis: Fortress, 1993; published in Great Britain as  Social-Scientific Criticism of the New Testament. An Introduction. London: SPCK, 1995.

_1 Peter. A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary._ Anchor Bible 37B. New York: Doubleday/Random House, 2000.

_Conflict, Community, and Honor: 1 Peter in Social-Scientific Perspective._ Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2007.

_La primera carta de Pedro._ Edición bilingüe y comentario. Biblioteca de Estudios Bíblicos 141. Transl. by Francisco Javier Molina de la Torre. Salamanca: Ediciones Sígueme, 2013.

_Beware the Evil Eye. The Evil Eye in the Bible and the Ancient World._ 4 vols. Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2015-2017.
